So, that's a bit of how to use this API
to create visualizations of waveforms.
And how to even use the waveform data to
start to create some really interesting
visualizations based on frequency,
if you're using the by code filter.
But now let's talk a little bit
more about analysis of frequency,
what it means to analyze the frequency,
and
we'll do it in a way that isn't
relying on the by code filter.
We're gonna do it in a way
that's a little bit lower level,
little bit rougher maybe a little bit.
Yeah, maybe a little bit more mathy,
but hopefully it will start to
break apart what is going on and
how we can use this in different ways.
So, remember how I was talking earlier
about low and high frequency sounds.
And showing this image here where
the waves will look compressed or
strung out like if it's a slinky that
you're pulling, or pushing it together.
And that corresponds to these
different tones that we're hearing.
Now, if we were to take the time
domain data, so time domain
represents the graph that we've been
talking about, that waveform graph.
And we were to apply what's called
a fast Fourier transform to it,
which is just a mathematical concept.
If we were to apply that mathematical
idea to that time domain data,
what we would end up getting is frequency,
a frequency response kind of graph.
And it's kind of broken down like
this in this graphic here where on
the left is the time domain data,
that's the graph with time.
And then each of these
little things in the middle,
those are the different
bands of frequencies.
So, the one that's closest to the time
domain, that's a rather low frequency
band, and then in the middle it's
a middle mid tone, sort of mid frequency.
And on the end it's a high frequency
when the slinky is pushed together, and
what it's doing is it's showing,
this frequency graph is showing
the signal strength of each of
these different bands of frequency.
And so right now in this example we have
three different bands of frequency and
we can see the blue is peaking
at those three moments.
But perhaps there'd be thousands
of different bands of frequency
if we're analyzing the audio
with the web audio API.
That's a little bit hard
to wrap your head around so
I'm gonna show it in
a couple of different ways.
This is another way of visualizing
the frequency spectrum.
This is very common in audio workspaces
when you're trying to analyze audio and
starting to EQ it and equalize it,
and shape it a little bit.
And it looks like this on
the left on the vertical axis,
we have signal which is in decibels.
Decibels is a relative unit, for
the purpose of this course we're
gonna really just be talking about
the decimal value from negative 30
which we can assume is rather loud.
To negative 100 which is the lowest
that we're gonna really deal with,
which we can assume to be rather quiet,
pretty much silent.
But these are very relative terms, and
we're just gonna be using these values for
the sake of today.
But you might have to tweak those
values depending on your audio files,
depending on the sort of setup you have
and how loud your your sources really are.
Cuz they might not be within that range,
they might be quieter or
they might be louder.
And then on the horizontal,
we have the frequency,
which typically goes from zero hertz.
Hertz is a measure of a change per second,
basically.
And it goes from zero hertz to,
let's say some very high numbers.
So, like 10,000 or 20,000 hertz.
The exact number that it goes to is
actually called the Nyquist variable,
and that has to do with the sample
rate of the the audio context which we
typically don't control the audio context.
When we create it is usually
set up with whatever the device
wants it to be set up with,
which might be 44,100, and
the Nyquist is that divided by two, which
is typically around 21K in terms of hertz.
But in this graph,
it just maxes out at 10K, but
in the web audio typically
you can kind of imagine that
it's gonna be like either 10 or
20 K in terms of frequency.
And when it reaches that point, it's so
high pitched that we can
no longer really hear it.
So typically in an audio file
you won't really need any
signal that goes beyond these values.
I think the human hearing maxes
out at something like 20K, or
something like that,
I don't know the exact number.
But once it reaches that
point it just becomes so
high pitch that we can't hear it anymore.
And so typically Web Audio and
just audio in digital formats
doesn't really try to
capture those frequencies.
Another way to visualize this, instead of
it being a graph with all of these many
thousands of bands and sort of detailed
line going from zero to some large value.
Imagine we were to split the frequency
spectrum from zero to 22k,
we would split it into
discrete individual bands.
And so, let's say we were to use these
bands that I've defined here just
arbitrarily like 0, 50,
200, 1,000, 5,000, 22,000.
If you were to listen to a kick drum and
pass that through a spectrum analyzer, or
some sort of graph like this,
it might end up with a result like
this where the kick drum has these bass
tones, really low frequency tones.
And it's pumping the signal
in that end of the graph,
whereas a piano might be more
around the mid-tones, and
it might be shifting depending on which
octave you're playing on the piano.
Voice again is kind of mid-tones
maybe higher mid-tones,
maybe lower depending on the voice.
And then something like treble,
so chime and high pitched tones,
those might be more in the thousands
of hertz kind of range.
And so, just with these graphs you
can start to see how we can start
to sort of split apart an audio
file into different buckets.
And maybe do some different
visualizations based on those buckets.
So, maybe we have
something where the circles
are only changing when the kick drum hits,
but
then we have some lines that are only
changing when the piano hits.
And maybe some text is moving
around when the voice is happening.
You can start to visualize things based
on these different frequency bins.
Here's how it looks in an array, so we
use the function get float frequency data
which is kind of like the time domain,
just now we're using frequency.
We pass it into a frequency array where
the lowest index is zero index here,
this represents the zero hertz, so
the lowest amount of frequency.
Whereas the highest index in the array
represents the highest amount of frequency
we're trying to capture,
which might be around 22k.
And the actual value within each element
of the array, as I was saying earlier,
it's gonna go, let's say from around
negative 100 to negative 30 decibels.
Just as a little note, if you do have
a different audio signal that's within
a very specific range of decibels or
within a range that's not
really captured here.
You can change the minimum and
maximum decimals of the analyzer node, so
that it's giving you back variables
that are a little bit more in line with
the type of signal you're working with.
And one other little way to sort of
visualize this just trying to really bring
this home is, let's say you're trying
to create a graphic where you're trying
to scale circles based on the different
frequencies, based on kick drum voice.
And maybe something like a cymbal crash,
with the red band here what I'm doing
is I'm taking some starting point and
some ending point, and averaging the whole
signal between those sort of points.
So within everything within that red band
I'm taking the average signal of it and
mapping that to the size
of the red circle.
And then doing the same for the blue
band and the same for the green band.
And that's gonna be the kind of code
we're gonna to be looking at here in
the next demos.
I have a little tool which is
I've found it quite useful.
It's modeled based on a filter
that is an Ableton Live.
It's called spectrum.search.sh,
and what it does is it
visualizes with an audio spectrum like
an analyzer node using Web Audio API.
And it gives us back the frequency graph
for any audio file that we pass into it.
So, for example,
I'll just open up our source audio, and
I'll just put in this piano track here,
drag and drop it in.
And it will play the audio, and
show the graph as it plays.
[MUSIC]
And so something here on the bottom left
to note is that you can move your mouse
around and
see the frequency at where your mouse is.
So, here on the left is
low frequency sounds,
you can hear this piano track is not
too high and low frequency sounds.
It's really sort of the signal is
very high in this middle range,
between 170 hertz to
around 1.5k kilohertz.
And you can actually hear, if you listen
to the sound, as the piano notes are being
hit, the person who's playing the piano
is going up and down the keyboard.
And you can see that signal is pumping in
a way that you can actually sort of see
the different frequencies.
[MUSIC]
So, one of the interesting things actually
with frequency that I think is kinda
cool is that, if you put your mouse let's
say on the 440 hertz here, this one here.
This band here represents the note C.
And so when we're talking about music, and
talking about different
notes in music like C, D,
A, etc., those are just
representations of frequency.
And so C is represented,
depending on the tuning and
things like that, but
generally we represent C as 440 hertz.
And so
if you hear a constant 440 hertz signal,
you're hearing something in the note of C,
or in pitch of C.
And I just find that really interesting
that we're just labeling these notes
are really just frequencies
they're hearing to our ears.
And based on that you can actually
start to get some kind of accurate
visualizations based on different notes
that are being played if you're able to
capture that.
One more thing here is that
the vertical axis of your mouse is
giving you the decibels.
So, you can actually even find out,
let's say,
let's say you want to visualize
something between this band here.
You might know that it's always going
from the maximum for negative 30 decibels
to the minimum around negative 70
decibels, or maybe a little lower.
And so you can just look within that
range and sort of shape the wave, and
shape the data that you're
getting to be within that.
[MUSIC]